---
title: "Enabling Access To Non-Point Source Risk Mapping Tools Using Open Source Software And Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) Standards: The Development Of The SCIMAP Webapp"
collection: talks
permalink: /talks/2013-08-12-mySCIMAP
date: 2014-08-12
venue: 'Hydroinfomatics'
citation: ' S. {Reaney} and P. {Wells}, Enabling Access To Non-Point Source Risk Mapping Tools Using Open Source Software And Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) Standards: The Development Of The SCIMAP Webapp. Presented at Hydroinfomatics 2014 in New York'
location: "New York, USA"
type: "Talk"
---

SIM REANEY (1) AND PETER WELLS (2)
(1): Department of Geography, Durham University, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK
(2): Lutra Consulting, 23 Chestnut Close, Burgess Hill, West Sussex, RH15 8HN, UK

Non-point (diffuse) pollution is a key environmental pressure effecting water quality and ecology in lakes and rivers. Many governmental and NGO bodies are working to tacking the problem but their efforts are constrained by the complexities of the problem. To enable the spatial targeting of the mitigation measures at the landscape scale, the SCIMAP risk mapping approach was developed by Durham and Lancaster Universities in the UK. The approach was well received but the desktop implementation created problems for users.  NGO users generally did not have the required datasets or GIS skills. Governmental users within a corporate managed IT environment were not able to install the desktop software. Using web based technologies, it has been possible to overcome the problems faced by both sets of users.
The SCIMAP WebApp is a rich internet application consisting of a GIS user interface that allows users to easily generate risk maps for diffuse pollution. All the calculation and modelling procedures are completely linked and automated, the calculation of the risk maps be achieved in a more efficient and timely manner, and therefore contributing to improve decision-making. The application is a web-based and can be accessed through most of the modern web browsers. The web application was entirely developed using Open Source Software and OGC standards.
A custom module was developed for GRASS GIS to simulate hydrological mechanisms involved in diffuse pollution. Users can use available data on topography and land cover and parameter sets within the SCIMAP spatial database or can also upload local data. The input data are passed to the server-side of the SCIMAP application to run simulation. Simulation time has been optimised within the GRASS module. Results are shown on the client-side of the application or alternatively, can be downloaded and imported to Desktop GIS or any kml based viewer.
