---
title: "Spatio-temporal dynamics in phytobenthos structural properties reveal insights into agricultural catchment dynamics and nutrient fluxes"
collection: talks
permalink: /talks/2016-12-01-Spatio-temporal-dynamics-in-phytobenthos-structural-properties-reveal-insights-into-agricultural-catchment-dynamics-and-nutrient-fluxes
date: 2016-12-01
venue: 'In the proceedings of AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts'
citation: ' S. {Reaney},  M. {Snell},  P. {Barker},  A. {Aftab},  N. {Barber},  C. {Benskin},  S. {Burke},  W. {Cleasby},  P. {Haygarth},  J. {Jonczyk}, &quot;Spatio-temporal dynamics in phytobenthos structural properties reveal insights into agricultural catchment dynamics and nutrient fluxes.&quot; In the proceedings of AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts, 2016.'
location: "San Francisco, USA"
type: "Talk"
---

Low order streams are spatially extensive, temporally dynamic, systems within the agricultural landscape. This dynamism extends to the aquatic communities within these streams, including the phytobentos, which demonstrates considerable resilience to diffuse anthropogenic nutrient pressures and changing climate dynamics. The phytobenthos community can substantially contribute to the food web, in particular diatoms, which dominate photo-autotrophic assemblages in low order streams. Diatoms are widely used in ecological monitoring because of their high sensitivity to environmental condition, but knowledge is limited on the ecological effects of winter disturbances and variance introduced by multiple and interacting pressures (N, P, sediment), introducing bias in understanding temporal dynamics in benthic diatom communities. Using the environmental time series data from long term monitoring within the River Eden Demonstration Test Catchment programme, we assess the impact of multiple hydro-chemical stressors on phytobenthic community resilience, and synthesize the impact of an extreme winter event. Monthly data from diatom communities collected in the Eden DTC from March 2011 to present show that river flow, strongly coupled to precipitation, is a key driver of these communities. Discharge has a direct effect on communities through scouring, but is also tightly correlated to nutrient delivery, such that 80% of the annual TP load arrives in 10% of the time. Trophic Diatom Index (TDI) values demonstrated considerable resilience by the stability of inter-monthly TDI scores over 5 seasonal cycles against the characterised highly variable hydrological regime. This research demonstrates that well characterised winter disturbances are critical to understanding drivers of aquatic dynamics. This has implications for catchment diffuse pollution policy, farm management and economics, given the climate projections of increases in frequency and intensity of extreme winter events, which may alter instream nutrient fluxes.

Use [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=Spatio+temporal+dynamics+in+phytobenthos+structural+properties+reveal+insights+into+agricultural+catchment+dynamics+and+nutrient+fluxes){:target="_blank"} for full citation
